---
layout: default
---

This is a new effort to gather efforts to help translate into English the "Ruby
Hacking Guide":http://i.loveruby.net/ja/rhg/book/. The RHG is a book
that explains how the ruby interpreter (the official
C implementation of the "Ruby language":http://www.ruby-lang.org/) works
internally.


To fully understand it, you need a good knowledge of C and Ruby. The
original book includes a Ruby tutorial (chapter 1), but it has not
been translated yet, and we think there are more important chapters to
translate first. So if you have not done it yet, you should read a
book like the "Pickaxe":http://www.rubycentral.com/book/ first.

Please note that this book was based on the source code of ruby 1.7.3
so there are a few small differences to the current version of
ruby. However, these differences may make the source code simpler to
understand and the Ruby Hacking Guide is a good starting point before
looking into the ruby source code. The version of the source code used
can be downloaded here: http://i.loveruby.net/ja/rhg/ar/ruby-rhg.tar.gz.

Many thanks to "RubyForge":http://rubyforge.org for hosting us and to
Minero AOKI for letting us translate his work.

h2. Help us!

This translation is done during our free time, do not expect too
much. The book is quite big (more than 500 pages) so we need help to
translate it.

People who are good at Ruby, C and Japanese or English are
needed. Those good at Japanese (native Japanese speakers are of course
welcome) can help translate and those good at English (preferably
native speakers) can help correct mistakes, and rewrite badly written
parts... Knowing Ruby and C well is really a requirement because it
helps avoiding many mistranslations and misinterpretations.

People good at making diagrams would also be helpful because there is
quite a lot to redo and translators would rather spend their time
translating instead of making diagrams.

There have been multiple efforts to translate this book, and we want to see if
we can renew efforts by creating an organisation on github. Interested parties
can join in by starting a pull request on this repo
https://github.com/ruby-hacking-guide/ruby-hacking-guide.github.com
There is a mostly derelict mailing list at
"rhg-discussion mailing list":http://rubyforge.org/mailman/listinfo/rhg-discussion
feel free to introduce yourself (who you are, your skills, how much free time you
have), but I think the best way to propose or send corrections/improvements
is to send a pull request. If you start a feature branch along with a pull
request at the start of your work then people can comment as you work.

There is an old SVN repo, that is hosted at
The RubyForge project page is http://rubyforge.org/projects/rhg.
It has been imported here, and I will attempt to give credit and re-write the
SVN/Git history when I can.

As for now the contributors to that repo were:

* Vincent ISAMBART
* meinrad recheis
* Laurent Sansonetti
* Clifford Caoile
* Jean-Denis Vauguet


h2. Table of contents

Some chapters are previews. It means they have not been fully reviewed,
some diagrams may be missing and some sentences may be a little
rough. But it also means they are in open review, so do not hesitate
to post suggestions on the mailing list.

* Preface
* Introduction

h3. Part 1: Objects

* Chapter 1: Ruby language minimum
* "Chapter 2: Objects":chapter02.html
* "Chapter 3: Names and name tables":chapter03.html
* "Chapter 4: Classes and modules":chapter04.html
* Chapter 5: Garbage collection
* "Chapter 6: Variables and constants":chapter06.html
* "Chapter 7: Security":chapter07.html

h3. Part 2: Syntax analysis

* Chapter 8: Ruby language details
* Chapter 9: yacc crash course
* "Chapter 10: Parser":chapter10.html
* Chapter 11: Context-dependent scanner
* Chapter 12: Syntax tree construction

h3. Part 3: Evaluation

* Chapter 13: Structure of the evaluator
* Chapter 14: Context
* Chapter 15: Methods
* Chapter 16: Blocks
* Chapter 17: Dynamic evaluation

h3. Part 4: Around the evaluator

* "Chapter 18: Loading":chapter18.html
* Chapter 19: Threads

* Final chapter: Ruby's future

